---
layout: post
title:  "Zoning laws and their enforcement perpetuates racism"
description: "Zoning laws are powerful tools of institutional oppression, and they're alive and well today"
date:  2017-12-26 06:00:00 -0700
crosspost_to_medium: false
categories: [zoning]
tags: [zoning, racism]
permalink: zoning-is-racist
image: /images/title_image.jpg
---

**Abstract:**

The modern American system of zoning is racist and violent.

Kind, liberal people who don't want their neighbors to build adjacent to their property line do not feel personal animosity towards black people, but in their actions are supporting a racist, deeply immoral system.

Here's what most people say about the pro-social value of zoning:

> Zoning laws help local agencies plan the physical development and use of real property in the entire municipality. Zoning preserves property values and makes cities and towns better places to live. 
> 
> Localities typically divide their jurisdictions into segments called "zones" on which particular types of use are permitted. 
> 
> For example, one area of a town might be zoned for residential use, one nearby may be zoned for commercial use, and areas on the outskirts of town may be zoned for industrial use. 
> 
> Without zoning laws, a business might be able to purchase a parcel next to a home and build an incompatible structure which the owner operates at all hours of the day and night. 
> 
> Zoning laws also protect businesses that engage in nonresidential land use by making sure they can conduct their business without interference from neighboring landowners. 
> 
> Besides restricting the uses of real property, zoning laws regulate **the density allowed on a property**, the **intensity of use**, **number of parking spaces determined by the use**, how parking spaces are surfaced, fencing, **setback requirements**, signage, **home occupations**, and **landscaping**.



## Modern Zoning is Racist

Modern zoning is deeply racist. It's one of the primary mechanisms by which systemic racism continues today.

The evidence is strong. Not strong enough that it will convince anyone who refuses to believe that there is a _possibility_ that zoning is rooted in racism, but if you're open to evaluating if this might be true, the following resources are a good place to start:[^2nd-order-effects]

- [The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/32191706-the-color-of-law)
- [The Racist History of Zoning Laws (FEE)](https://fee.org/articles/the-racist-history-of-zoning-laws/)
- [Denver built its neighborhoods around racist housing policies. But “neighborhood defenders” refuse change. (Denver Post)](https://www.denverpost.com/2020/06/13/bosselman-denver-built-its-neighborhoods-around-racist-housing-policies-but-neighborhood-defenders-refuse-change/)
- [Arizona State University 'Culture of Place' (ASF294) course handout: "The Racial Origins of Zoning in American Cities", by Christopher Silver (PDF)](https://www.asu.edu/courses/aph294/total-readings/silver%20--%20racialoriginsofzoning.pdf)
- [Exclusionary Zoning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exclusionary_zoning)

So much for racism.

What about violence? Zoning laws often seem like the opposite of violence, right? They help "preserve neighborhood character", "promote property value preservation" 

## Modern Zoning is Violent

I can hear someone screaming at me through time and space:

> Zoning isn't violent! 

I'll just quote from a variety of lawyers, discussing the topic of `zoning violations`

> As a result of these economically challenging times, many property owners come up with creative means to maximize income generated by their properties, whether residential or commercial. [...] Other examples include property owners expanding property uses, including the operation of new businesses out of an existing property not zoned for the new use. These activities can often generate significant additional revenue which is especially important in times of financial distress.
> 
> Despite the good intentions of property owning entrepreneurs, new uses can often lead to zoning infractions and legal action by municipal zoning authorities. The result is a tension between property owners working to achieve the highest and best use for their property and zoning authorities working to minimize impacts and preserve the predictability of uses for a given neighborhood.

_[source](https://frascona.com/what-property-owners-should-know-about-zoning-violations/)_

Farther down:

> The first step in a zoning enforcement action is usually the issuance of a citation. These citations are generally served on a property owner for an alleged violation of the applicable zoning code. Most zoning authorities claim to be “complaint driven” meaning that zoning inspectors cite property owners for zoning violations where someone, usually a neighbor, has complained. The citation will generally have a court date on which the property owner must appear in court and enter a plea.
>
> [...]
>
> In Colorado, municipal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction with authority to impose fines of not more than a total of $1,000 and not more than one year in jail. County courts (which typically hear county zoning violation cases) are also courts of limited jurisdiction with authority to impose judgments of up to $15,000 and jail time.

$15,000 and jail time? A zoning violation leads _directly_ to me having potentially enormous amounts of money taken from me, and _me being locked in a box_?

----------------------

So, zoning violations can lead to jail time. If I object to going to jail, men with gun come and force me into jail. 

> You're catastrophizing, Josh. Zoning is to keep industrial concerete plants from springing up next to an elementary school, or to keep a meat packing plant out of urban parks.

Lets take a look at [LegalMatch](https://www.legalmatch.com/law-library/article/zoning-code-violations.html), an article titled: `What are Zoning Code Violations?`

>> What are Some Examples of Zoning Code Violaionts?

> For instance, if business activity such as product manufacturing is being held in a residential area, this will likely be considered a zoning code violation. Other common examples of zoning code disputes may include:

    - Constructing a building that is not allowed in that particular zone
    - Building a structure (or an addition to a structure) that is too tall or that obstructs another person’s view or access to light/air space
    - Conducting various operations in non-designated areas, including: manufacturing, packaging, selling, growing, labeling, and other business/industrial activities
    - Living in spaces that are not designated as residential areas
    - Creating amounts of pollution or noise that exceed local limits
    
How about [FreeAdvice Legal](https://real-estate-law.freeadvice.com/real-estate-law/zoning/violating_zoning_laws.htm), titled `Consequences of Violating Zoning Laws`:

> When the local zoning agency determines the property owner has violated the local zoning laws, the violator can suffer serious consequences for noncompliance. 
> 
> Suppose, that in a strictly residential area, the homeowner adds an extra back room in the house to operate a massage business. 
> 
> Even if neighbors don't notice the illegal business activity, when the homeowner later decides to sell, he or she cannot guarantee the property is "up to code", and runs the risk of being forced to accept a reduced price or withdraw the home from the market. 
> 
> Even if ownership has changed hands since the illegal construction, if it comes to the attention of the local authorities, perhaps through a tax assessment, the new owner can be ordered to pay a fine, and be required to comply with the zoning regulations, which may mean being forced to tear down the illegal construction.

## No city I would live in would threaten it's citizens with jail for doing reasonable things with their own property

Hah. I wish. If I found a city that didn't make _credible threats of violence against the inhabitants_ for using their property in reasonable ways, _I would move there_.

Lets look at examples of zoning legislation. 

Here is [Los Angeles County Department of Regional Planning](http://planning.lacounty.gov/view/what_is_a_zoning_violation) answering the question `What is a Zoning Violation`?

They list (and include pictures!) common violations:

### Garage Conversions

> Every single family residence built after 1955 and located on a lot of less than one acre is required to maintain covered off-street parking facilities.

### Inoperable Vehicle Storage

> Inoperable vehicles that are not part of a classical car collection are prohibited on private property.

### The Storage of Vehicles in the Front Yard

> The parking or storage of vehicles in front yard areas is prohibited unless on a driveway.

### Commercial Vehicle Storage

> Commercial vehicles exceeding 6,000 pounds cannot park on a public street in any residential or agricultural zone for more than two hours. They may not be stored on private property.

### Commercial Uses in Residential Zones

> Businesses are prohibited in residential zones - unless a qualifying home based occupation.

### Junk and Salvage

> Storing items classified as junk and salvage material on commercial, residential and agricultural properties is not permitted.

### Business Signs

> There are many specific requirements regarding the placement of business signs in commercial zones. Temporary signage such as banners and portable signs are prohibited.

### Outside Display and/or Sales

> Merchandise displayed and sold outside of an enclosed building is generally prohibited.

Then the website _really_ telegraphs it's purpose. This webpage exists to help neighbors report zoning violations:

> This is a partial list of common violation types. If you have any specific inquiry regarding a possible zoning violation, please call the Zoning Enforcement Section at (213) 974-6453 or (213) 974-6483

Hilariously, the same government body proudly proclaims it's anti-racism credentials:

[Anti-Racism, Diversity and Inclusion Initiative (LA County Chief Executive Office)](https://ceo.lacounty.gov/antiracism/)

---------------------

## Zoning regulations hurt _you_

Zoning regulations hurt everyone. Not just the people that are directly affected by the zoning regulations. 

For example, a young couple trying to purchase property, but because of 'legal' limits on density, _there's not enough housing being built for the people that want to live in an area, and this scarce housing drives cost up even as housing becomes scarce_.






### Resources

- https://medium.com/@ABetterCAF/why-we-keep-saying-us-zoning-laws-are-the-legacy-of-racism-eee64e58e337
- https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-25/critics-of-new-york-city-s-zoning-history-sound-off
- https://palladiummag.com/2019/10/22/what-no-one-wants-to-admit-about-housing-politics/


### Footnotes

[^2nd-order-effects]: A critical piece of zoning laws is that the racist outcomes is often a _second order effect_. For a variety of reasons, one cannot directly say "I do not want black people, poor people, or anyone not like me to live in my part of town". The creators of the law intend the racist effects, but because the racist outcomes are seemingly unrelated to the intended effects of the law, it can feel unexpected to have this concept laid out. 